layout: post
title: notes from "The changing role of the embryo in evolutionary thought"
permalink: /poop/developmentally
date: 2022/06/09
date_updated: 2024/06/16
published: false
---

=> a history of biology as a history/lineage of questions that were posed, addressed, or dropped:

“The conceptual connection between the development of an individual (ontogeny) and the evolution of a lineage (phylogeny) predates the 1859 publication of Darwin’s Origin of Species. However, if evolutionary developmental biology is an old study, how could it be thought to be new in the year 2000? 
*The answer is that for most of the twentieth century only a minority of evolutionary biologists believed that ontogenetic development had any relevance at all to evolution.* The Evolutionary Synthesis of the 1930s and 1940s established the mainstream of evolutionary biology (Mayr and Provine 1980). Population genetics was regarded as a causally adequate model of the evolutionary process. Natural selection was the sole direct-giving mechanism of evolutionary change, and the phenomena of macroevolution (patterns of evolution above the species level) were simply extrapolated from microevolution (natural selection within populations). The ontogenetic development of individual organisms had no place in this framework.”

“One of the wildest homological speculations in history was put forth by Etienne Geoffroy St.-Hilaire in the 1820s. Geoffroy proposed ´ that arthropods and vertebrates had identical body plans. The obvious problem (to knowledgeable anatomists) was that arthropods have their circulatory (haemal) system on their dorsal side and their neural system on their ventral side. Vertebrates are the reverse, with their neural spine along their back. This forced Geoffroy to suggest that the “identical” body plans were flipped upside -down with respect to the dorsal–ventral axis. Vertebrates travel with their neural spine toward the sun, whereas arthropods travel with their neural spine toward the earth. There was laughter all around….Geoffroy may have had the last laugh. Seven years after Appel’s publication, it was discovered that the dorsal–ventral axes of vertebrates and arthropods are determined by homologous genes – but that their expression patterns were reversed in the two groups (De Robertis and Sasai 1996). Indeed, the expression patterns of an entire suite of genes used to specify the dorsal and ventral structures were inverted.”

“The book shows how an evo–devo sensibility produces a different narrative of the history of biology than a neo-Darwinian sensibility. I could not have written this book in 1990, prior to the discoveries of deep genetic homologies. The reason is not that my own arguments and historical narratives rely on the molecular discoveries themselves. They do not. The reason is that I intend to assume the legitimacy of evo–devo. I do not intend to argue for it. Such an assumption would have been controversial in 1990. The deep genetic discoveries allow me the same luxury that the neo-Darwinian commentators had between 1959 and the 1970s, when the philosophical and historical stage was being set. Like them, I can now reasonably assume that my favorite theory pretty much tells it like it is.”

“The game is afoot,” thought I. “Someone is cooking the books!” (though perhaps not in those very words)…Historical narratives could be read simultaneously as explanations of Darwin’s 100-year-old success over his critics, and of the parallel success of the Evolutionary Synthesis over its modern critics. I realized that a historian who took the “constraints” side of the modern adaptation–constraints debate would write a very different history of evolutionary biology.”

“We (philosophers especially) do not do history from an abstract love of history. David Hull and I have come to quite different conclusions in our historical writings. In a discussion of our differences, David pointed out to me that my own writing was as biased as I claimed the traditional Synthesis histories to have been. He said that his work of the 1960s and 1970s was “history done in a good cause.” He made me realize that mine is exactly the same. But it’s now thirty years later. His good cause was won (with his able help), and my good cause is a different cause.” (10);

1.6 Explanatory relativity

interest-relativity
“If you want to understand a scientific theory or research tradition, look at what the scientists want to explain, and what they think counts as an explanation of it. If you want to understand the difference between a pair of competing scientific theories, look at why each theory’s advocates believe that the others’ explanations are faulty.”

“Atomic theory did not replace the phlogistic explanation of the qualities of compounds. Instead, it abandoned the goal of explaining the qualities of compounds entirely, and it replaced it with the new goal of explaining the proportionate weights of elements and compounds–a poor substitute, to my mind. Nevertheless, the new explanatory goal was achievable, and the old goal was not. To understand the differences between these theories, we must understand the differences in the questions they asked – which is to say, the explananses for which they sought explananda.” (21)

“The methodological differences between research programs are often hidden behind the verbal similarities in the questions they ask. This can lead to apparent conflicts where no conflict really exists. (Imagine a debate between priests: “Willie robs banks because that’s where the money is!” “No, he robs banks because he has no moral conscience!”) It is important to be aware of these potential confusions. Aristotle’s four causes are really different kinds of explanation; each may apply to the “same” explanans (or rather to four different explananses that have the same verbal expression).” (21)

“Function versus structure is a contrast not simply about the facts of the world but about what phenomena require explanation. The advocates of one side will frequently announce that their opponents “do not give explanations, but only descriptions.” This is a sure sign of explanatory relativity. A large part of my task will be to tease apart these disputes and try to separate those that involve actual matters of fact from those that are based on disagreements about what needs to be explained. Explanatory relativity does not imply a relativity of truth, or even a relativity of theoretical adequacy. Some theories really are better and some are worse. Structuralist theories are better in some domains, and functionalist theories in others (Amundson 1989). It is difficult to understand the contrast until the differences in explanatory goals are understood.” (22)

1.7 
“Professional historians of science will soon recognize that a philosopher wrote this book. It sometimes reads as if history is made up of the interactions of ideas rather than of people. It will sometimes overgeneralize the similarities and underestimate the complexities of historical events and debates. This the hazard of doing history and philosophy at the same time.” (22)

1.8 
“Even aside from their commitment to functionalism (adaptationism), Darwin and the Evolutionary Synthesis share an explanatory goal that separates each from structuralist theories. I begin to examine this contrast in Chapter 4 and continue throughout the book: Darwinian theories are change theoretic whereas structuralist theories are form theoretic. Very roughly, this implies that Darwinian theories do not accept responsibility to explain form (or anything else) in the evolutionary entity; rather they explain change in the entity through evolutionary time (change in form, or change in anything else). The ancestral features are assumed as a background condition. In contrast, structuralist theories accept responsibility to explain form both in ontogenetic and phylogenetic time, and to associate the two aspects of form-explanations. So ancestral form is not merely a background condition for structural theories; it must receive an appropriate (e.g., ontogenetic) explanation. The changetheoretic explanatory goal is shared by Darwin and the Evolutionary Synthesis.” (23)

“ISHPSSB is the International Society for the History, Philosophy, and Social Studies of Biology, pronounced “Ishkabibble.”” (footnote, 23)

=> history of biology as a history/lineage of questions that were posed, addressed, or dropped

