---
layout: post
title: a(n incomplete) theory of ~~everything~~ (some aspects of) biology
permalink: /poop/incomplete
date: 2024/07/02
date_updated: 2024/07/02
published: false
---

_or, a synthesis of my philosophy from my stint in biology_
or, a personal tour of the cooler parts of biology

I don't like bugs, I find animals cute but don't naturally understand them, don't like the wet slimy stuff typical of living things, squeamish about veggies gone rotten, worms, slugs, dead bodies, etc. I eat meat but I don't like the smell of raw meat. 

And you call yourself a biologist?

Kind of, but not really. 


how/why do biological systems fail so weirdly?
when i was young and ignorant and thought that going to medical school would help me understand this, i had to write tedious essays about my motivations (my family and friends are too healthy to have that kind of story)
tay sachs vs multiple things gone wrong as seen in frailty
acardia amorphus and self organization -- surprisingly still organized

self organization and natural selection

cancer chimera

Howard Pattee's claim that “the way to get novelty is not to create something new but to constrain what was there before" has been one of the most weirdly compelling but baffling statements that I've come across. 

#incomplete nature

tentative summary of book: 'work (thermodynamic to morphodynamic to teleodynamic) to create constraint to keep dynamics far from equilibrium/naive expectation, exploring edges of possibility space'

This book conveniently synthesizes complex systems adjacent concepts that I like and have been collecting over the years, e.g. hofstadter, kauffman, shannon, constraint (pattee); to a lesser extent, rosen

I would've enjoyed reading this several years ago, when I first came across Howard Pattee's claim: “the way to get novelty is not to create something new but to constrain what was there before" because I found it baffling and counterintuitive -- but I think I've slowly understood it better over the years. Meanwhile, this book is surprisingly centered around 'constraint' -- there is a whole chapter devoted to it. He's even got Stuart Kauffman on board: ‘it takes constraints on the release of energy to perform work, but it takes work to create constraints’
‘constraints are information and information is constraint' (392)

“Evolution is not imposed design, but progressive constraint” (426)

‘My counterintuitive hypothesis is that whenever we recognize that a system exhibits intentional properties, it is not because of something addd to the physical process involved, but rather quite literally because it depends on the physical fact of something specifically missing from that object or process (43)
=> Pattee? pruning of neurons?

‘Being alive does not merely consist in being composed in a partiular way. It consists of changing in a particular way’ (175)
maybe why i loved calculus
'a stable system is a dead system'

#aging

optimization and fitness landscapes

## what you see is what persists -- life
the first cell never died. diversitfication in strategies

## senescence
evo devo -- why do we see it? error vs adaptation
cancer chimera

## growing neural automata
aging, space of functions that satisfying constraints
constraints vs specifics, evo devo

waddington: aging is development

dosage compensation

## what persists? metabolism first
genome after, senescence
lorenzo

fire does not innovate; limited propagation
anticipatory systems, changing itself to adapt to environment

dubious of evo foundational model, physical environment


## structuralism vs adaptationalism
the essence of something is what does not change across examples -- how to identify it

varying phenotypes -- what changes? focus on genes, 

aging -- what should stay the same, but does not?

looking at what changes over time, correlation vs causation i.e. wrinkles

senescence, and eliminating them

why are they there in the first place? we know how to get rid of them, bodies know how to housekeep/take out the trash -- why don't they do it? 

evolutionary programmed death, error, maladaptive/shorter term tradeoffs 

expressivity vs nonsense tradeoff, hofstadter

adaptation of individual, adaptation of populations



